Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, Ricardo Lopes and today I'm
joined by Doctor LC M Johnson. She's a philosopher,
bioethicist, and neuroethicist and associate professor of bioethics and
humanities at SUNY Upstate Medical University. Her research focuses
on ethical issues related to brain injuries including sport-related
neurotrauma, brain death, and disorders of consciousness, and today
we're focusing on her book, Philosophical, Medical and Legal
controversies about brain death. So, Doctor Johnson, welcome to
the show. It's a pleasure to have you on.
Thank you. I'm happy to be here.
So, I mean, I know that this is a
multifaceted question, but to get, to get into the
topic of brain death, perhaps it would be better
for us to start with what death is or
how we understand death, just common people how they
understand it and also philosophers, doctors, and people like
that. So, what is that? And, and how do
you approach such a question?
This is a surprisingly complicated question given that death
is a universal part of existence. So at the
most basic we can say that an entity is
dead when the biological processes that maintain life cease.
So for humans and other animals, that would be
respiration and circulation. Traditionally, we've always understood that when
an animal, including humans, died was when it stopped
breathing. But of course, to say that you're dead
when you're no longer alive is almost a tautology,
and there is tremendous variation in beliefs about death
as a social and a spiritual and a cultural
phenomenon. So death is, for example, in many belief
systems when the soul leaves the body. So we
have, you know, this traditional understanding of death which
aligns with our Medical and biological understanding that when
you stop breathing and when your heart stops beating,
you die. This is, this is a pretty much,
uh, you know, universally accepted way of thinking about
death. It's been complicated by medicine and modern medicine,
which has the ability to Maintain artificially respiration and
circulation using heart lung machines, using ventilators, and and
a lot of other wonderful medical technology that can
keep those biological processes going. Um, BEYOND what used
to be possible. And of course this is only
true if you are in a part of the
world that has access to advanced and very expensive
medical technology. So for many people around the world,
the traditional understanding of death is still just the
only way that people die. For people in Europe,
in the United States, and other places where we
have advanced technology, it gets more complicated because of
our ability to maintain those biological processes sometimes when
that person is no longer conscious and maybe perhaps
when they will never again regain consciousness.
And because I also mentioned with the ideas that
people just commonly have about death, uh, I would
imagine, and this is a point I guess that
we'll come back later on in our conversation. But
I guess that it's, it's also important to understand
how people commonly, and commonly, of course, I know
that it would probably vary across culturally and between
across individuals, how people approach death, but it's also
important for us to have at least some idea
of how people commonly approach it because it might
clash with the medical understanding of death,
right? Right. As I said, almost universally among human
cultures, there is this agreement that death happens when
you stop breathing and when your heart stops, um,
or, or when the soul has departed the body,
and, and sometimes the the lack of breathing is
an indication, right, that the soul, the animating force,
has left the body, and that's when it's appropriate
for us to To begin death behaviors, the traditions
and the rituals that we perform when someone has
died. It's also a legal turning point for people.
So when you have died, you cease to be
a person and a citizen. You cease to have
rights, but your heirs may have rights to your
property. Um, YOU know, we might open your will
at that point, and of course we will engage
in death behaviors like preparing you for burial or
for cremation and, and things like that. Those are
things we don't do when you are still alive,
right? So your status changes in a lot of
ways when you have died, both medically and legally
and socially. The problem for many centuries has been
how we actually diagnose or determine that someone has
died. Of obvious ways that, of course, people must
have known about for many, many centuries are rigor
mortis when the body becomes stiff and cold and
decomposition when the body begins to decay. Until we
had things like stethoscopes where we could more easily
listen to someone and see if they're breathing or
if their heart was beating, medically speaking, we had
the same techniques for determining that someone had has
died. Today it's even more complicated because of our
ability to resuscitate people when their heart has stopped
or when they have stopped breathing. And of course,
even today there are still cases where people that
we think are dead. End up waking up in
morgues. They're misdiagnosed as being dead, so it can
still be fairly complicated and difficult sometimes to determine
whether or not someone is dead.
That's about deaf, generally speaking, but when it comes
to the top, to the specific topic of brain
death, when did such a concept first develop and
how has it evolved over time?
The concept of brain death emerged alongside developments in
critical care medicine, including the invention of respirators or
ventilators that could support lung function and resuscitation and
cardiac bypass for the heart. So, uh, through the
1950s and 1960s, we see these technologies emerge. It
did not take very long for doctors to begin
to question. The value of maintaining life in patients
who had severe brain injuries. Those patients could be
kept alive with medical technology, but there wasn't much
else that we could do to treat their brain
injuries. So there was this possibility of having patients
who were kept alive long term in an untreatable
and irreversible coma. Mhm. So the concept of brain
death emerges here, the death of the brain, but
not the body. And as it happened at the
same time, scientists and doctors began to make progress
with organ transplantation, so the development of surgical techniques
and Innovations in immunology, um, our ability to understand
and address the problem of organ rejection. So some
of those physicians began looking to so-called brain dead
patients as possible organ donors. So in 1968, A
committee at Harvard University, which was led by Dr.
Henry Beecher, published a paper in the Journal of
the American Medical Association defining what they called irreversible
coma and describing the diagnosis, and by irreversible coma
they meant brain death. And they said an organ,
whether it's the brain or any other organ that
no longer functions and has no possibility of functioning
again, is for all practical purposes dead. So here's
our first sort of formal definition of brain death
as a permanently non-functioning brain. They also said something
else that was interesting. They attempted to equate brain
death with circulatory respiratory death or traditional death, um,
by stating that When you stop breathing, when your
heart stops beating, your brain is going to die
within a few minutes, and therefore, brain death really
is the same thing as death as we have
traditionally understood it. Um, AND It was always the
death of the brain is, is what they wanted
us to understand. Now, I think that was a
bit of a stretch because death, which we always
understood as the ceasing of the heartbeat and the
breath, is really not the same as death in
which the brain is non-functioning, but the body continues
to function, where the body continues to breathe and
has a beating heart is still warm and sometimes
can move, for example, right? It brain death doesn't
look like traditional death. There were a couple of
reasons why the Harvard Committee adopted this sort of
newly invented way of being dead, and one was
that at the time doctors could still be charged
with medical homicide if they disconnected a patient from
life support. So we didn't really have a legal
mechanism in place to allow them to do that.
As a consequence, there were patients with very severe
brain injuries who were being maintained on life support,
but for whom we could do very little except
keep them alive. The second reason was organ transplants.
We didn't have a source of living organs. We
had no way to acquire viable organs without killing
the donor. So being able to say that that
patient is brain dead and therefore dead. WOULD make
it possible to take their organs, they would already
be considered dead even though they were still breathing
and still had a beating heart. Doctors at this
point were already experimentally acquiring organs from so-called brain
dead patients, but it wasn't clear that it was
actually legal for them to do so.
And are there different types of brain death?
There are two main sets of criteria that have
been accepted in various countries for brain death, and
one is called whole brain death. The other is
called brain stem death. Whole brain death is the
legal standard in the United States, where the state
laws define the criteria for determining death. And those
state laws are all modeled on what's called the
uniform determination of Death Act, which was a piece
of model legislation. That was promulgated in 1980. So
whole brain death is the irreversible cessation. Of all
functions of the entire brain, including the brain stem.
Alongside the determination of brain death, there are also
criteria for circulatory respiratory death that are very similar,
irreversible cessation of all circulatory and respiratory functions. Some
countries, including the United Kingdom, for example, Use a
brain stem death standard and that standard defines death
as the irreversible loss of consciousness and the irreversible
loss of the capacity to breathe. So both consciousness
and the capacity to breathe are functions regulated by
the reticular activating system in the brain stem. So
they determine a non-functioning brain stem results in irreversible
loss of consciousness and capacity to breathe, and that
is death. Interestingly, both the brain stem criteria and
the whole brain death criteria are basically the same.
The diagnostic criteria. And the reason for this is
that it really isn't possible to diagnose whole brain
death or the loss of all functions of the
entire brain. When the Harvard committee first proposed this,
they included a diagnostic method that included determining unresponsiveness
or unconsciousness, loss of movement and breathing, a lack
of reflexes, and a flat electroencephalogram or EEG. Today
we know that many patients who are diagnosed as
brain dead can still have some electrical activity that's
detectable on EEG. They also can have some functioning
in some parts of the brain, so the hypothalamus,
for example, or the pituitary gland, which are sort
of located in the center of the brain. The
primary diagnostic tests for whole brain death are basically
the same as the ones for determining brain uh
brain, brain stem, I'm sorry, um, the absence of
brain stem reflexes, coma, and or unconsciousness and apnea
or the loss of the ability to breathe. So
they, the two sets of criteria for these two
types of brain stem or brain death are are
identical, basically. There is a 3rd more recent standard,
which is sometimes called the unified brain-based determination of
death standard, which kind of goes back to the
Harvard criteria and the rationale that when circulation and
respiration stop, the brain will die. So this standard
tries to establish a single set of criteria for
death rather than two standards that exist now. A
single criterion for death, but with two different ways
to diagnose it. One way to diagnose it is
using circulatory respiratory criteria, and the other way to
diagnose it is to use the brain death criteria,
unconsciousness, apnea, and, and loss of reflexes. So this,
this unified standard basically says it's always brain death,
right? When we talk about death, we're always talking
about the death of the brain. We have two
ways to diagnose it. One focuses on breathing, circulation,
one focuses on on brain stem activity. And there
was a position paper in Canada published last year
which um which defines this and accepts this as
the the guidelines for Canadian brain death, although Canada
doesn't have, for example, a legally defined standard. One
reason for favoring this unified brain-based determination of death
standard. IS that there has been a lot of
legal and philosophical controversy from the very beginning about
whether brain death is really equivalent to biological death
as we have traditionally understood it. The other reason
is that organ donation is increasingly common in situations
where the donor is not brain dead. And that's
called donation after circulatory death, where someone has a
serious brain injury, there's a decision that's made to
withdraw life sustaining treatment. Um, AND then with consent
of the donor's family, typically, um, that they become
an organ donor. We wait for their heart to
stop, and then we immediately procure their organs within
a very short time. As we all know, it's
possible, it's, it's often possible to resuscitate that donor's
heart, um, which raises the question about whether they
were really irreversibly dead. So according to the unified
standard, we know that that brain is going to
die once circulation stops, so we can say that
the patient is also brain dead when their heart
stops. Um, Brain dead patients have beating hearts, so
we can still say that patient is dead whether
their heart is beating or not, or could be
beating with assistance.
And from a philosophical standpoint, is our current understanding
of brain death in medicine a dualistic one in
any way?
There's implicit dualism in the medical understanding. Brain death
is this idea that the body and the mind
or the soul, or whatever you want to call
it, um, can come apart, right? That the body
could continue to function. And even be in relatively
good health, while the essence of that person, what
makes them a person is missing. So this is
akin to the notion of the soul leaving the
body. Of course, the soul is not a clinical
or a biological entity or a structure or a
function of any particular organ that we can, you
know, take a picture of and poke or anything
like that. Um, THE, the UK Academy of Royal
Medical Colleges in their, um, position on brain stem
death. Actually do equate brainstem death with the death
of the person. So what they say is that
death entails the irreversible loss of those essential characteristics
which are necessary to the existence of a living
human person. And so the definition of death should
be irreversible loss of the capacity for consciousness and
irreversible loss of the capacity to breathe. On the
face of it, this seems a little strange. Um,
THESE are doctors who are trying to define what
it is to be a person, um, which is
an age-old philosophical question. Um, AND the essence of
a person as they define it, is, is made
up of these two capacities, the capacity for consciousness
and the capacity to breathe. This seems like an
odd way to define what a person is. Um,
IS someone who is comatose and unconscious, no longer
a person. Is someone who is unable to breathe
on their own without assistance no longer a person?
Is there something special about losing both of those
capacities that makes you no longer a person? Setting
aside those questions, what they are doing here is
really defining the death of personhood, the death of
a person rather than the death of a biological
organism. What makes you a person is lost, they
say, when these essential brain functions are lost. So
this is a very dualistic idea, the idea that
the body and the person or the essence of
the person can separate, can part ways. This is,
of course, in many ways a very ancient ancient
way of thinking about body and soul. It's one
that we see in the Abrahamic religions, in Buddhism,
and many other spiritual traditions. So it is strange,
I think, to see it in modern scientific empirical
medical discourse. And I personally, I think that defining
personhood is really not something that's within the domain
of medicine, and they are sort of stepping outside
of of their own domain and doing this.
So if there's this form of dualism that you
mentioned there in our current understanding of brain deaf
in medicine. I would imagine that that would point
to some metaphysical commitments when it comes to conceptualizing
brain death in medicine, but are there also moral
commitments behind it or not?
With traditional death, we see the the biological, the
metaphysical, and the moral all come together. The body
does not breathe, doesn't have a beating heart, the
body is dead, that person's no more. We all
agree about this as death. With a little bit
of variation about when exactly the the soul is
going to depart that body, um, which in some,
some spiritual traditions is what's considered true death, right,
when the soul actually leaves. In brain death. Um,
ONE issue is that we don't always have Global
loss of brain function. There are areas of the
brain that can continue to function. Um, AND there
are, there are actually quite a few cases in
the medical literature of long-term survival of the body
in brain death. So pregnant patients have continued to
gestate living fetuses and have given birth. Children have
undergone puberty and have proportional growth. The hair grows,
the body continues to excrete waste and absorb nutrition.
These bodies are very much alive. If we had
global loss of brain functioning, where the entire brain
was destroyed, It would be exceptionally difficult to keep
that patient's body functioning for very long because there
are some essential functions which the brain regulates. Something
like this was, I think, what the Harvard Committee
had in mind. But since then, in the last
several decades, the professional criteria for what counts as
brain death have shifted. The professional guidelines, like the
guidelines for the American Academy of Neurology, no longer
required that the entire brain is non-functioning or destroyed.
So it seems really evident that there is this.
Dualistic metaphysical commitment within medicine to this idea that
someone, some person can be dead when their brain
is no longer functioning at a certain level, a
level that supports the existence of a mind. Um,
THERE'S no longer a living person there, just a
living body. And this does imply that the body
and the mind or the body and the person
can separate, can part ways, are two different entities.
And that what makes you a person in some
way is a function of your brain and not
the rest of your body. So that is almost
a kind of substance dualism, right? One that separates
the substance of the brain, mind, and the rest
of the corporeal body. There is also a moral
or an ethical commitment because it assumes that what
makes the brain, what the brain makes possible, including
consciousness and interaction and thinking, sociality, all of those
things are also what makes human existence valuable. And
that existence without a fully functioning brain can have
no value, no value for that individual, and no
value for anyone else. Now, what makes human existence
valuable is a really important question. It's a question
that has really vital ethical and cultural and spiritual
and personal importance, but I don't think it's a
medical question, and I don't think it's a question
that can be Decided by medicine. We're saying here
that Someone who's chronically unconscious and apneic are basically
as good as dead. And that we should treat
them as if they are dead, which is to
say don't treat them medically at all, send them
to the morgue or send them to organ procurement.
So this is a kind of reasoning by analogy,
and although many people would agree with these statements
that someone who's brain dead is as good as
dead, analogies themselves are not medical or scientific or
even legal facts. Chronically unconscious apneic individuals are not
the same as a decaying corpse, who should be
sent to the morgue or put in a box
and buried, right? We, we also see this idea.
COME about in the the language that's used to
describe medical treatment when someone has been determined to
be brain dead. So after that brain death is
declared, a lot of doctors will no longer say
that the patient is receiving life sustaining treatment, right?
The language changes to organ support, even though we're
talking about essentially identical treatments. Treatments that are keeping
the body alive. So this kind of reinforces the
unscientific and dualist notion that there's just no longer
a person there, no longer a living patient, but
just a material body, or a collection of living
organs. And this is a way of using synectady,
right? Using a part to refer to the whole.
That's intentionally dehumanizing. It involves this metaphysical stance regarding
what persons are, and an ethical stance concerning which
humans have value, and it shifts the locus of
our ethical concern from the individual patient to the
needs of others, to potential organ recipients who might
benefit from the active organ support.
So in the book, you go through several different
kinds of challenges to brain death. And first, there
are the epistemic challenges. In the domain of epistemology,
what is there to consider here when it comes
to brain death?
So one epistemic challenge is that it's simply not
possible to To definitively determine or diagnose whole brain
death in the vast majority of cases, um, in
the cases where we can, where there is just,
you know, global and catastrophic injury to the brain,
we'll probably not be able to keep that patient
alive long enough to do a brain diagnosis. Um,
WE don't have tests that can determine that all
parts of the brain are non-functioning. We use surrogate
tests. These can include those brainstem tests like loss
of consciousness, breathing, and brain stem reflexes. They also
include tests of brain perfusion. Where we can, we
can do scans, um, and look for uh blood
circulation in the brain. And one thing that frequently
results in a brain death diagnosis is that there's
an injury to the brain that causes edema or
swelling of the brain. Because our brains are encased
in this hard skull, that swelling can really be
catastrophic because the brain has nowhere to go. And,
uh, and it will result in additional injury to
the brain above and beyond whatever caused the initial
injury. And that swelling can have the effect of
cutting off circulation, cutting off the blood supply to
the brain. And that in theory, is going to
cause a global brain injury and loss of function.
But there is this hypothesis out there. That there's
a condition called global ischemic penumbra, in which circulation
to the brain is at such a low level
that it can't be detected by our current medical
technology, but that it's just enough to support cellular
life in the brain. And moreover, The hypothesis goes
on the way to brain death, on the way
towards total loss of circulation and perfusion to the
brain, the brain is always going to pass through
this global ischemic conumbra where we have very minimal
circulation and perfusion. So there's epistemic uncertainty in the
diagnosis of brain death. Even with brain stem death,
we have epistemic uncertainty about the loss of consciousness.
In disorders of consciousness, so brain disorders that result
in impaired consciousness like coma or unresponsive wakefulness syndrome,
which used to be called the vegetative state. And
the minimally conscious state, there's a high rate of
misdiagnosis of unconsciousness, around 43%, which is really a
very high rate of misdiagnosis, and that has persisted
for many decades. So these are patients who appear
to be unconscious, but who are conscious, but not
responsive. They're unable for a variety of reasons to
respond when we test them for signs of consciousness.
Now, some of the same injuries that result in
brain stem death can also result in disorders of
consciousness. Someone in a coma will also not breathe
spontaneously, so they appear to satisfy criteria for brain
death. Someone in the unresponsive wakefulness syndrome can breathe
on their own. And can have recovery of one
aspect of consciousness, wakefulness, but they're gonna lack awareness.
So the main difference between brain death or coma
or UWS is that We don't think there's any
possibility at all that the brain dead patient can
recover consciousness. Here's where that gets interesting. In 2013,
a 12 year old girl named Jehai McMath was
declared brain dead in a hospital in Oakland, California.
So she'd experienced uncontrolled bleeding after a routine surgery,
which resulted in a prolonged cardiac arrest and a
hypoxic brain injury. Now, by all accounts, Expert neurologist
diagnosed her and she met the clinical criteria for
brain death. I don't know of anyone who disagrees
that she was properly diagnosed according to the existing
criteria, and that includes people who are very skeptical
of the existing criteria, but they, you know, have
said, yes, she was properly diagnosed according to our
clinical guidelines. Her family objected to the brain death
diagnosis and refused to consent to withdrawal of treatment
on religious grounds. They said that as long as
her heart was beating, they believed she was alive,
so they had a traditional biological understanding of death.
Mhm. They took the hospital to court, and after
a court battle that lasted for several weeks, the
family was finally allowed to take Jahai, who was
considered under California law to be dead and a
corpse, but a ventilated corpse, um, and they flew
her to from California to New Jersey. New Jersey
is the only state in the US that has
an explicit religious exemption for brain death. So in
New Jersey, if the patient has a religious objection
to neurologic criteria for death, the patient can only
be declared dead by circulatory respiratory criteria. So now
we have this strange situation where Jehai McMath is
considered legally and medically dead in California. She had
a death certificate and legally alive in New Jersey.
Um, SHE survived for 4 more years. And received
care primarily in her family's home. During that time,
Neurologists who examined her found what they say is
evidence that she had recovered consciousness. And was likely
in a minimally conscious state. Now, if true, she
would be the only known case of someone recovering
from brain death. Brain death is by definition, irreversible.
So this would be really extraordinary, right? Some neurologists
believe that Jihai was experiencing global ischemic promumbra when
she was diagnosed as brain dead, that the circulation
to her brain was. Minimal and undetectable, but was
not completely absent. So there's the epistemic challenge. Do
we have the capability to diagnose whole brain or
brain stem death? Can we say with certainty that
a brain injury, that brain death, is irreversible? Part
of what makes this more complicated is because of
the legal status of brain death that someone is
considered legally dead, it's Most common that we remove
life sustaining treatment, which will result in that patient's
body dying. Or they become organ donors, which will
also result in that patient's body dying. So what
we typically do after a brain death diagnosis makes
it very difficult for us to know. Is this
person really irreversibly dead with a non-functioning brain, or
is this sort of a self-fulfilling prophecy that we
have put into place?
Yes, and we'll come back in a bit to
some of those cases where there's conflict between the
commitments and worldviews of patients and doctors or people
who are closely related to patients, of course. But
uh, the second set of challenges. ARE the medical
ones. So what is, what is there to consider
here?
For medicine, those epistemic challenges are, of course, very
real and urgent, although they're not always acknowledged. Um,
DOCTORS are the people who have to communicate with
families about the patient. They are the entities who
have to determine and declare death. Not all doctors
agree that brain death is truly deaf, but that
is sort of the, the, the common position that
brain death is truly death. Um, NOT all doctors
agree that the clinical guidelines are adequate, um, in
the US. The clinical guidelines, the current guidelines which
were released just last year, um, by the American
Academy of Neurology, those guidelines have changed over time,
and they are no longer in alignment with the
law on brain death because we really can't diagnose
the irreversible loss of all functions of the entire
brain. So knowledgeable neurologists also have to contend with
that, with the disconnect, with the knowledge that when
they tell a family that their loved one is
brain dead, they're not actually conforming to the legal
standard, but they are conforming to what is in
effect an approximation, the best that we can actually
do medically speaking.
So, and there's also the ethics behind brain death
and how we deal with it. So what are
some of the main questions or considerations that we
need to address from an ethical standpoint when it
comes to brain?
So brain death imposes and and enforces these moral
and metaphysical worldviews on, on patients and on their
families in a way that actually can be very
onerous, especially for, for families who reject brain death,
right, or who deny brain death. Now, when we,
when we do this, right, when we tell someone,
look, your, your child or your husband or, you
know, your, your sister is dead. They are brain
dead, they are legally dead. We are not imposing
this view on them, this diagnosis on them in
a way that extends their rights or protects that
affected individual from serious harm. In fact, what it
does is it really abolishes the rights of those
who are judged to be brain dead. Now the
people who denied brain death. ARE in the minority,
right? They're they're likely to be subjected to the
involuntary withdrawal of life sustaining treatment. There have even
been cases where the organs of the patient have
been um removed against the wishes of the family
or the surrogate. Mhm. It's not unreasonable to say
that, you know, death requires that the heart stops
beating and that breathing ceases, but that is not
only a traditional way of understanding and determining death.
It's also a scientific and a medically accepted way.
So when a family, you know, comes to us
and says, Look, her heart is still beating, she
can't be dead. Right, they're they're not saying something
that is outrageous and and outlandish and completely divorced
from the facts. In fact, that is one of
the ways that we determine that someone has died.
So the burdens For people who only accept that
traditional understanding of death are really very significant, and
they're not benign, and they're not equally distributed, right?
Only people who reject brain death are subjected to
involuntary withdrawal of life sustaining treatment or organ procurement.
Only they will see their loved ones stripped of
their rights and losing their own rights. To make
decisions about what happens to their family members. So
there is an issue of justice here, right? An
issue of whether we are um providing equal treatment
to everyone or whether we are treating people who
reject brain death differently than we would treat those
who are accepting of the diagnosis and willing to
um donate organs, for example.
So you've already alluded or referred briefly to some
of the considerations when it comes to my next
question, but what exactly happens when the commitments and
the worldview behind brain death or associated with brain
death are not shared by the patient or the
surrogate?
There was a case in the UK several years
ago where A young toddler, um, choked on a
little piece of fruit, and he suffered a hypoxic
brain injury as a result. It took a while
to get him to the hospital. It took a
while for the doctors to be able to remove
that little piece of fruit. Um, SO his parents
were Muslims from Saudi Arabia. Their child was declared
brain dead. His parents objected. They wanted to take
their child home to Saudi Arabia, where life sustaining
treatment would be continued, right? They would not ever
withdraw life sustaining treatment from that child. So they
went to court and uh the court ruled against
them and said, your child is dead. And it's
not in your child's best interest to continue life
sustaining treatment. It's in his best interest to remove
treatment and allow him to quote, die a dignified
death. So this is an extraordinary example of the
law and medicine. Being in alignment here and really
running roughshod over the religious and the cultural beliefs
of a family. Beliefs that did not cause harm
to anyone in the UK because this family was
planning to repatriate their child to Saudi Arabia, right?
So their right to decide what happened to their
child, what medical treatment to provide for their child,
and whether their child lived or died. We're taken
away. And that is an example of how this
sort of medico-legal worldview about brain death can be
imposed on patients or on their surrogates without them
really having any ability to To push back or
fight back against that. If the courts are going
to agree with doctors in all of these cases.
Um, AND they don't always, in the United States,
we've had cases that sort of go both ways.
The problem is when you end up in court,
Well, courts are not really better at deciding these
metaphysical and ethical issues, um, than, than physicians are,
right? Um, OR hospitals are. So we're talking about
really important and fundamental personal, cultural, social, spiritual beliefs
and worldviews here. And it's, it's important here that
we remember that the belief that most people have
as an alternative is that When the heart stops
and breathing stops, then we will accept and understand
that, you know, our loved one is dead. That's
a valid medically accepted medically diagnosable death. It's really
not controversial. So why trample on people's rights and
their reasonable beliefs in order to maintain this controversial
medico-legal dogma about brain death.
So when there are these kinds of conflicts, should
we, from an ethical perspective, should we respect uh
the, the interests and the worldviews of the patient,
or the surrogate or the doctor?
So laws have coercive force, right? And when we
compel a definition of personhood that's not compatible with
someone's individual moral, philosophical, cultural, social, or spiritual beliefs,
that can be really coercive in a way that
it is very easy to perceive as oppressive or
as a kind of legally sanctioned medical neglect. Some
would even say, my, you know, my child, my
sister was not dead. The doctors killed her by
removing life sustaining treatment. It's not surprising that brain
death is contested when we view it as a
way of determining something that is Very much implied
in the law that this person with rights, this
subject of justice, is transformed by a diagnosis into
a non-person who no longer has any rights. Because
of course, as I said, personhood is not the
domain of medicine. I don't think it's the domain
of law either. The law, in fact, has frequently
been wrong about who is and who is not
a person. When we look historically at the status
of women or the status of children or enslaved
peoples, right, who were not considered persons under the
law. So the law actually, you know, very much
can come out of alignment with our understanding of
who's a person who has rights, who should have
rights. So when we sort of impose those those
medico legal definitions of death on people, it is
coercive. It is um it is coercive when they
are unable to stop us from ending life sustaining
treatment or unable to stop us from taking organs
from that patient.
And so in this particular case, just going back
to the second part of my question, whose worldviews
and interests should be respected here?
The majority of people in Western societies, I think,
do believe that even if brain death isn't exactly
the way we've traditionally understood death, it's close enough.
So many people believe that for them personally, right?
It's, it's close enough they wouldn't want to be
kept alive with such a severely injured brain where
they won't recover consciousness, will never be able to
do the things that they valued in life, and
so on. And for those people, there's really no
problem with with brain death. OK. For the minority
who do not believe that brain death is really
truly death, but who believe that death Occurs in
the traditional way when the heart stops and when
breathing stops. I think it's reasonable to respect that
because they have an understanding of death that's reasonable,
that's accepted, accepted by almost everyone. Now, it would
not be reasonable for someone to believe in human
immortality, right? To insist on resuscitating a corpse who
is in rigor mortis or ventilating a decaying body.
Um, IN, in some Buddhist traditions, it's believed that
the soul leaves the body about 7 days after
the heart and breathing stops, that that is the
true death. Well, it would be unreasonable to insist
that the body remain in a hospital bed during
those 7 days after the heart has stopped and
the breathing has stopped. But we do have two
medically and legally accepted ways of being dead, this
traditional way that is in agreement with pretty much
everyone's spiritual, cultural, and common sense views. Um, AND
this more recent invented way that's controversial for a
lot of people, not just controversial for lay people,
but for doctors, for lawyers, for philosophers, for theologians.
So I think we can and we should accommodate
those reasonable, uncontroversial views about death. And allow that
minority group of patients and families to say brain
death isn't death as we understand it. We want
to keep this patient on a ventilator.
Does the value or principles such as patient autonomy
also apply in the context of brain death?
I think it does. So we think that based
on the value of patient autonomy, patients should be
able to make choices for themselves about the medical
treatment that they will accept and the medical treatment
that they will refuse. Family members or surrogates or
proxies, depending on how they're defined, um, Exercise that
autonomy on behalf of the patient. So when the
patient's no longer able to speak for themselves, their
their family members speak for them, right? And and
exercise their autonomy by proxy, as it were. So
we do currently allow patients to refuse medical treatment,
even if it will result in them dying, an
avoidable death. Um, AND we should also, I think,
permit patients to choose which standard of death among
our reasonable accepted standards which are available is the
one that's going to be used to determine their
death. One that is in keeping with their values,
with their beliefs, and with their preferences.
So I think that throughout our conversation, we've already
touched on the point of organ donation and how
it ties to brain death in a way. So
I have one final question then. Which should be
considered reasonable objections against the standard medical view of
brain death or even death more generally among the
ones that we explored here.
Well, there are so many reasons, right? There are
philosophical, there are medical, there are legal um reasons
to question brain death, and it has been controversial
from the very beginning and continues to be controversial
today. It's also endorsed by many people as being
necessary and a useful legal fiction, a legal fiction
that solves the practical and ethical problems that emerged
alongside our advancements in medicine. And a number of
people have referred to brain death as a legal
fiction, and I think it's a really interesting and
important way to think about. What brain death is
and how it functions in our world. So legal
fictions are basically um legal decisions or legal arbitrary
legal lines that are established for purposes, but which
are not otherwise rooted in reality or in facts.
So as an example, Um, in most places, there
is an age when someone is considered a legal
adult. In the United States, that's typically 18 years
old. So the day before your 18th birthday, you
are basically the same person that you will be
the next day. But legally, the day before your
birthday, you're a child, and the day after you're
an adult, and you have the rights and responsibilities
of an adult as soon as you turn 18
on the anniversary of your birth. That's a legal
fiction, right? There's also this concept called legally blind,
where someone who has very impaired vision, um, such
that they're not allowed to do things like drive
a car, for example. They're not completely, literally blind,
but they are considered legally blind, which limits their
right to do certain things and at the same
time might entitle them to certain accommodations or benefits
as a disabled person. So this gets to that.
DISTINCTION of being legally dead for all practical purposes,
right? You can be for all practical purposes blind,
or for all practical purposes an adult or According
to those who accept brain death for all practical
purposes, dead. If brain death is a legal fiction
like that. It's an especially interesting one, because as
a human being, A citizen, your status will change
very significantly on your death. You will no longer
be a moral person, a member of the moral
community who's entitled to moral consideration. You're no longer
a legal person, a citizen with legal rights and
responsibilities. The loss of those moral and legal rights
is very significant, right? You are no longer entitled
to medical treatment. Your family loses the right to
act on your behalf. Um, IN many places, it
can mean that doctors can withdraw medical support unilaterally
without consent from you or your family. So, you
know, some doctors will really lean into that legal
definition of death. When they're confronted with families who
don't accept brain death, or don't accept that their
loved one is dead, and they will say, the
law says this person is dead, so they're dead,
right? And we no longer have to treat this,
your, your sister or your brother or your child.
It's a, it's a way of stating a legal
fact as if it was also a biological or
a medical fact when when actually they sort of
have come apart there. There's an interesting case, I
think, in Japan. Japan did something really interesting and
I think valuable in thinking about brain death. There
was a national debate about whether or not brain
death should be codified as legal death in Japan,
and it went on for more than a decade.
This followed a controversy in 1968 in the early
days of transplantation, where a doctor was charged with
murder for taking a patient's organs for transplant. So
there was mistrust of organ donation and brain death.
There were also these deeply important social, cultural, and
religious beliefs in a country with many Buddhists and
Shintos. Where the idea was that a warm breathing
body with a heartbeat cannot be dead, right? This
rejection of Western dualism about the separability of body
and mind. So in 1999, Japan's parliament passed a
law on organ donation that was basically a compromise,
and it allows the determination of brain death only
for purposes of organ donation and only when there
is first person consent. So the patient themselves must
decide in advance that they're willing to be an
organ donor and to be declared dead by neurologic
criteria. What I find interesting about this is that
Japan is not an especially pluralistic, multi-ethnic, multicultural, or
diverse country. Yet they created this compromise on brain
death that respects both majority and minority viewpoints about
brain death and is very transparent about why brain
death is valuable. So it recognizes and it transparently
acknowledges the importance of brain death for organ donation,
while also respecting important social, cultural, and spiritual objections
to brain death as human death and respects individual
autonomy when it comes to choosing. Both organ donation
and brain death. I think if we had that
same transparency and respect elsewhere. In the United States,
for example, or in European countries. A lot of
the controversies about brain death would actually be resolved.
Because we could have almost any criteria for brain
death, whole brain death, brain stem death, unified brain-based
death, as long as we allowed people who objected
to opt out and to choose the alternative of
circulatory respiratory death. People who want to be organ
donors would have to recognize that this is what
it means for you to be an organ donor,
right? We could be transparent about it and then
we wouldn't. Risk exploiting people or instrumentalizing persons and
using them as organ donors for the purposes of
serving others.
Great. So, the book is again philosophical, medical, and
legal controversies about brain death. Of course, I'm leaving
a link to it in the description of the
interview. And Doctor Johnson, just before we go, would
you like to tell people if there are any
places on the internet where they can find you
and your work?
Um, LET'S see. Well, if they go to Google
Scholar, they can find a a profile that includes
my uh all of the publications that I have.
I have a website um with my university, and
then I also do have a personal website, it's
symjohnson.com.
Great. So I'm adding that to the description of
the interview and Doctor Johnson, thank you so much
again for taking the time to come on the
show. It's been a very informative interview. So thank
you.
Thank you, Ricardo. It's been a pleasure.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullern, Fredrik Sundo, Bernard Seyches Olaf,
Alexandam Castle, Matthew Whitting Berarna Wolf, Tim Hollis, Erika
Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the Matter
Robert Windegaruyasi Zu Mark Neevs Colin Holbrookfield governor Michael
Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnseroro and Hal Herzognun
Macha Joan Labrant John Jasent and Samuel Corriere, Heinz,
Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus Fran David Sloan
Wilson, Asila dearauujurumen ro Diego Londono Correa. Yannick Punterrusmani
Charlotte blinikolbar Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back medicine, Gary Galman
Samovallidriei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall Edin
Bronner, Douglas Free Francaortolotti Gabrielon Corteseus Slelitsky, Scott Zacharyishim
Duffyani Smith Jen Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul
Georgianneau, Luke Lovai Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin,
David Williams, Diocosta, Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee
Junior, old Eringbo. Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert
Gray, Zigoren, Jeff McMann, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark
Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Storry, Kimberly Johnson,
Benjamin Gilbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael
Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman, Perkrolis, Kate van Goller,
Alexander Hubbert, Liam Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular
John Nertner, Ursula Gudinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean
Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Net. A special thanks
to my producers. These are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas
Steffini, Tom Venneden, Bernard Curtis Dixon, Benick Muller, Thomas
Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni
Cortiz and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers,
Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank
you for all.